# Keep it Simple, Stupid (KISS)

## May 3rd, 2015
## Updated: August 8th, 2019

One of the most often-broken engineering principles is Keep It
Simple Stupid (KISS).  Engineers love to use cool technologies to build
cool solutions that are complex, elegant, and future-proof.  The
problem is, of course, the actual situation frequently just doesn't call for anything that fancy.

That is why I am writing this blog as simple, static -HTML-Markdown.  Dynamic
blog solutions, like [wordpress](http://wordpress.com),
suffer from exploits and security holes.  Managing them is a pain.
Other solutions like [gitit](https://github.com/jgm/gitit)
(a git-backed wiki and my wiki of choice which I use for various things) don't
look very nice (and as a person who tells computers what to do for a living, I
had better at least have a passable web site that doesn't look like it
transparently proxies the wayback machine).  Twitter bootstrap made making a
nice looking website easy, but because everything is static, I can't easily
display my blog entries.

Interestingly, I made a different choice with our family cookbook.
For this project, it is important that non-technical users be able to
edit the recipies via the web UI.  It was also important to me,
however, that the recipies themselves be stored in git, and that I am
able to edit the markdown directly using only git.  To achieve both
of these ends, gitit seemed like the best option (and you can see the
results [here](http://cookbook.cmyers.org).

Some day, I may reinvestigate the best way to run this blog, but for
now, let's keep it simple.  When I go to write a new blog entry, I simply spit
out some markdown, commit and push.  For now, this is the right balance of
simplicity and features.
